TransferRates (old msr continuous capabilities) (#2358)
openmc-dev/openmc: docs/source/methods/depletion.rst

----------------
MSR Capabilities
----------------

A nice feature of Molten Salt Reactors (MSR), but more in general of
any liquid fuel reactor, is the capability to continuously reprocess the fuel
salt to remove fission products or to feed fresh fuel into the system.

Removal rate
------------

A removal rate is defined here as the rate at which nuclides are
continuously removed or added from one material to another. Mathematically, it
can be thought as an additional proportional term :math:`\mathbf{T}`
to the depletion equation, that can be rearranged as:

.. math::

  \begin{aligned} \frac{dn_i(t)}{dt} = \underbrace{\sum_j \gamma_{j\rightarrow i}
  n_j\overline{\sigma_j\phi} - n_i \overline{\sigma_i \phi}}_\textbf{R}  +
  \underbrace{\sum_j \gamma_{j\rightarrow i} n_j\lambda_{i\rightarrow j} +
  \lambda_{j\rightarrow i}n_i}_\textbf{D} -
  \underbrace{\epsilon_i \lambda_i n_i}_\textbf{T} \end{aligned}

where the reaction rate :math:`\mathbf{R}` and the decay :math:`\mathbf{D}` terms
have been grouped together so that
:math:`\mathbf{A} = \mathbf{R}+\mathbf{D}-\mathbf{T}`.

:math:`\lambda_i` is the removal rate coefficient defining
the continuous removal of nuclide :math:`i`.

> The behaviour of nuclide removal is similar to radioactive decay.

Author: It is already defined few lines above

> The behaviour of nuclide removal is similar to radioactive decay.

Reviewer: I see. How is $\epsilon_i$ different from $\lambda_i$? It looks like they have the same definition as written here.

> The behaviour of nuclide removal is similar to radioactive decay.

Author: Yes there was a bit a confusion in the description, thanks for noticing. Should be fixed now.

as we've seen before.

Note that if no ``dest_mat`` argument is passed to the
:meth:`~openmc.deplete.MsrContinuous.set_removal_rate()` method of the
:class:`~openmc.deplete.MsrContinuous` class, nuclides that are removed will not
be tracked afterwards.

Feeding rate
------------
To keep track of removed nuclides or to feed nuclides from one depletable material
to another, the respective depletion equations have to be coupled. This can be
achieved by defining one multidimensional square matrix with dimensions equal to
the number of depletable materials that transfer nuclides.
The diagonal positions are filled with the usual depletion matrices
:math:`\mathbf{A_{ii}}`, where the index :math:`i` indicates the depletable
material id, and the off-diagonal positions are filled with the removal matrices
:math:`\mathbf{T_{ij}}`, positioned so that that the indeces :math:`i` and
:math:`j` indicate the nuclides receiving and loosing materials, respectively.
The nuclide vectors are assembled together in one single vector and the resulting
system is solved with the same integration algorithms seen before.

Note that mass conservation in this case is assured by transferring the number of

> atoms directly and not the nuclide densities.

Reviewer 2: I disagree. What's written here is good, but the terminology should change from "multidimensional square matrix" to "block square matrix". It should say that the blocks are all of a dimension matching the number of nuclides in each material, and each partition of the unknowns vector corresponds to a single material. The resulting system has standard depletion matrices with reprocessing removal terms on the diagonal, and material-to-material coupling on the off diagonal.

> atoms directly and not the nuclide densities.

Reviewer 2: Spelling changes:

indeces -> indices
looses -> loses

The method for normalization can be chosen through the ``normalization_mode``
argument to the :class:`openmc.deplete.CoupledOperator` class.

----------------
MSR Capabilities
----------------

A nice feature of Molten Salt Reactors (MSRs), and in general of
*any*  liquid fuel reactor, is the capability to continuously reprocess the fuel
to remove fission products or to feed fresh fuel into the system.

Removal rate
------------

A removal rate as defined here is the rate at which nuclides are

> continuously removed from a material. T Mathematically, it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
continuously removed from a material. Mathematically, it
```

can be thought as an additional proportional term :math:`\mathbf{T}`

> to the depletion equation, that can be rearranged as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to the depletion equation, which can be written as:
```

.. math::

>   \begin{aligned} \frac{dN_i(t)}{dt} = \underbrace{\sum_j \int_0^\infty dE;
>   \f_{j\rightarrow i} N_j(t) \sigma_j (E,t) \phi(E,t)} - N_i(t) \sigma_i(E,t) \phi(E,t)}_\textbf{R}  +
>   \underbrace{\sum_j \lambda_{i\rightarrow j}  N_j(t) + \lambda_{j\rightarrow i}  N_i(t)}_\textbf{D} -
>   \underbrace{\epsilon_i \lambda_i N_i(t)}_\textbf{T} \end{aligned}
> 
> where $\epsilon_i$ is the removal rate of nuclide $i$. Here the transmutation terms :math:`\mathbf{R}` and the decay terms :math:`\mathbf{D}`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  \begin{aligned}\frac{dN_i(t)}{dt} = &\underbrace{\sum\limits_j f_{j\rightarrow i}
  \int_0^\infty dE  \; \sigma_j (E,t) \phi(E,t) N_j(t)  - \int_0^\infty dE \; \sigma_i(E,t) 
  \phi(E,t) N_i(t)}_\textbf{R} \\ 
  &+ \underbrace{\sum_j \lambda_{j\rightarrow i} N_j(t) + \lambda_{i\rightarrow j} N_i(t)}_\textbf{D} \\
  &- \underbrace{\epsilon_i \lambda_i N_i(t)}_\textbf{T} \end{aligned}

where :math:`\epsilon_i` is the removal rate of nuclide :math:`i`. Here the transmutation terms :math:`\mathbf{R}` and the decay terms :math:`\mathbf{D}`
```
Looks like I led you a bit astray with my last suggestion. This should fix the the equation rendering.

The method for normalization can be chosen through the ``normalization_mode``
argument to the :class:`openmc.deplete.CoupledOperator` class.

----------------
MSR Capabilities
----------------

A nice feature of Molten Salt Reactors (MSRs), and in general of
*any*  liquid fuel reactor, is the capability to continuously reprocess the fuel
to remove fission products or to feed fresh fuel into the system.

Removal rate
------------

A removal rate as defined here is the rate at which nuclides are
continuously removed from a material. Mathematically, it
can be thought as an additional proportional term :math:`\mathbf{T}`
to the depletion equation, which can be written as:

.. math::

  \begin{aligned}\frac{dN_i(t)}{dt} = &\underbrace{\sum\limits_j f_{j\rightarrow i}
  \int_0^\infty dE  \; \sigma_j (E,t) \phi(E,t) N_j(t)  - \int_0^\infty dE \; \sigma_i(E,t)
  \phi(E,t) N_i(t)}_\textbf{R} \\

>   &+ \underbrace{\sum_j \lambda_{j\rightarrow i} N_j(t) + \lambda_{i\rightarrow j} N_i(t)}_\textbf{D} \\

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  &+ \underbrace{\sum_j \left [ \lambda_{j\rightarrow i} N_j(t) - \lambda_{i\rightarrow j} N_i(t) \right ]}_\textbf{D} \\
```
Should be a `-` here. Whoops!

  &- \underbrace{\epsilon_i \lambda_i N_i(t)}_\textbf{T} \end{aligned}

where the transmutation term :math:`\mathbf{R}`, the decay term :math:`\mathbf{D}` and the new removal term :math:`\mathbf{T}`
have been grouped together so that
:math:`\mathbf{A} = \mathbf{R}+\mathbf{D}-\mathbf{T}`.

the removal efficiency :math:`\epsilon_i` and the removal rate coefficient :math:`\lambda_i`
define the continuous removal of the nuclide :math:`i`, which behaviour is similar to radioactive decay.
For simplicity, :math:`\epsilon_i` and :math:`\lambda_i`

> can be combined together in one single user-defined parameter that is defined again as :math:`\lambda_i`.

Reviewer: Does the user ever use both $\epsilon_i$ and $\lambda_i$ in the implementation? If not, maybe that could be a functionality that is added? It seems useful.

Author: Since it is just two constants multiplying each other, to me makes more sense to combine them in one.

Reviewer: I think being able to tweak the efficiency on-the-fly instead of making users do that would be a nice feature to have. The default efficiency could be 1. But it's not critical.

Note that this formulation assumes first order removal and
homogeneous distribution of nuclide :math:`i` throughout the material.

A more rigorous description of removal rate and its implementation can be found
in the paper by `Hombourger
<https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0306454920302024?via%3Dihub>`_.

The resulting burnup matrix can be solved with the same integration algorithms,
as we've seen before.

.. note::

>     if no ``destination_material`` argument is passed to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    If no ``destination_material`` argument is passed to the
```

The method for normalization can be chosen through the ``normalization_mode``
argument to the :class:`openmc.deplete.CoupledOperator` class.

--------------
Transfer Rates
--------------

> OpenMC allows continuous removal or feed of isotopes by adding an
> extra transfer rate term to the depletion matrix. An application of this feature

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OpenMC allows continuous removal or feed of nuclides by adding an
extra transfer rate term to the depletion matrix. An application of this feature
```

is the chemical processing of Molten Salt Reactors (MSRs), where one can
model the removal of fission products or feeding fresh fuel into the system.

A transfer rate as defined here is the rate at which nuclides are

> continuously removed/feed from/to a material.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
continuously removed/fed from/to a material.
```

.. note::

    A transfer rate can be positive or negative, indicating removal or feed
    respectively.

Mathematically, it can be thought of as an additional term :math:`\mathbf{T}`
in the depletion equation that is proportional to the nuclide density, which can be written as:

.. math::

  \begin{aligned}\frac{dN_i(t)}{dt} = &\underbrace{\sum\limits_j f_{j\rightarrow i}
  \int_0^\infty dE  \; \sigma_j (E,t) \phi(E,t) N_j(t)  - \int_0^\infty dE \; \sigma_i(E,t)
  \phi(E,t) N_i(t)}_\textbf{R} \\
  &+ \underbrace{\sum_j \left [ \lambda_{j\rightarrow i} N_j(t) - \lambda_{i\rightarrow j} N_i(t) \right ]}_\textbf{D} \\
  &- \underbrace{t_i N_i(t)}_\textbf{T} \end{aligned}

where the reaction term :math:`\mathbf{R}`, the decay term :math:`\mathbf{D}`
and the new transfer term :math:`\mathbf{T}` have been grouped together so that
:math:`\mathbf{A} = \mathbf{R}+\mathbf{D}-\mathbf{T}`.

> The transfer rate coefficient :math:`t_i` define the continuous transfer of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The transfer rate coefficient :math:`t_i` defines the continuous transfer of the
```

The method for normalization can be chosen through the ``normalization_mode``
argument to the :class:`openmc.deplete.CoupledOperator` class.

----------------
MSR Capabilities
----------------

A nice feature of Molten Salt Reactors (MSRs), and in general of
*any*  liquid fuel reactor, is the capability to continuously reprocess the fuel
to remove fission products or to feed fresh fuel into the system.

Removal rate
------------

A removal rate as defined here is the rate at which nuclides are
continuously removed from a material. Mathematically, it
can be thought as an additional proportional term :math:`\mathbf{T}`
to the depletion equation, which can be written as:

.. math::

  \begin{aligned}\frac{dN_i(t)}{dt} = &\underbrace{\sum\limits_j f_{j\rightarrow i}
  \int_0^\infty dE  \; \sigma_j (E,t) \phi(E,t) N_j(t)  - \int_0^\infty dE \; \sigma_i(E,t)
  \phi(E,t) N_i(t)}_\textbf{R} \\
  &+ \underbrace{\sum_j \left [ \lambda_{j\rightarrow i} N_j(t) - \lambda_{i\rightarrow j} N_i(t) \right ]}_\textbf{D} \\

>   &- \underbrace{\epsilon_i \lambda_i N_i(t)}_\textbf{T} \end{aligned}

Author: Fine for me. I guess once we've agreed with the renaming we can redefine here accordingly.

>   &- \underbrace{\epsilon_i \lambda_i N_i(t)}_\textbf{T} \end{aligned}

Author: I've renamed it `t` ("transfer") for consistency with the rest.

The method for normalization can be chosen through the ``normalization_mode``
argument to the :class:`openmc.deplete.CoupledOperator` class.

--------------
Transfer Rates
--------------

OpenMC allows continuous removal or feed of isotopes by adding an
extra transfer rate term to the depletion matrix. An application of this feature

> is the chemical processing of Molten Salt Reactors (MSRs), and can be used to

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
is the chemical processing of Molten Salt Reactors (MSRs), where one can
```

> model fission products removal or feed fresh fuel into the system.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
model the removal of fission products or feeding fresh fuel into the system.
```

A transfer rate as defined here is the rate at which nuclides are
continuously removed/feed from/to a material.

.. note::

    A transfer rate can be positive or negative, indicating removal or feed
    respectively.

> Mathematically, it can be thought as an additional proportional
> term :math:`\mathbf{T}` to the depletion equation, which can be written as:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Mathematically, it can be thought as an additional term :math:`\mathbf{T}`
in the depletion equation that is proportional to the nuclide density, which can be written as:
```

.. math::

  \begin{aligned}\frac{dN_i(t)}{dt} = &\underbrace{\sum\limits_j f_{j\rightarrow i}
  \int_0^\infty dE  \; \sigma_j (E,t) \phi(E,t) N_j(t)  - \int_0^\infty dE \; \sigma_i(E,t)
  \phi(E,t) N_i(t)}_\textbf{R} \\
  &+ \underbrace{\sum_j \left [ \lambda_{j\rightarrow i} N_j(t) - \lambda_{i\rightarrow j} N_i(t) \right ]}_\textbf{D} \\
  &- \underbrace{\epsilon_i t_i N_i(t)}_\textbf{T} \end{aligned}

where the reaction term :math:`\mathbf{R}`, the decay term :math:`\mathbf{D}`
and the new transfer term :math:`\mathbf{T}` have been grouped together so that
:math:`\mathbf{A} = \mathbf{R}+\mathbf{D}-\mathbf{T}`.
The transfer efficiency :math:`\epsilon_i` and the transfer rate coefficient

> :math:`t_i` define the continuous transfer of the nuclide :math:`i`, which
> behaviour is similar to radioactive decay.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
:math:`t_i` define the continuous transfer of the nuclide :math:`i`, which
behaves similar to radioactive decay.
```

:math:`t_i` can also be defined as the reciprocal of a cycle time
:math:`T_{cyc}`, intended as the time needed to process the whole inventory.

For simplicity, :math:`\epsilon_i` and :math:`t_i`
can be combined together in one single user-defined parameter that is defined
again as :math:`t_i`.

> Thus, setting a transfer rate coefficient of 1 s^-1 at 100% efficiency, would be
> the same as setting 10 s^-1 at 10%.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Thus, setting a transfer rate coefficient of 1 s\ :sup:`-1` at 100% efficiency, would be
the same as setting 10 s\ :sup:`-1` at 10%.
```

Note that this formulation assumes first order transfer and
a homogeneous distribution of nuclide :math:`i` throughout the material.

A more rigorous description of removal rate and its implementation can be found
in the paper by `Hombourger
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anucene.2020.107504>`_.

> The resulting burnup matrix can be solved with the same integration algorithms,
> as we've seen before.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The resulting burnup matrix can be solved with the same integration algorithms
that are used in the absence of the transfer term.
```

.. note::

    If no ``destination_material`` is specified, nuclides that are removed
    or fed will not be tracked afterwards.

Coupling materials

> ------------------
> To keep track of removed nuclides or to feed nuclides from one depletable material

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
------------------

To keep track of removed nuclides or to feed nuclides from one depletable material
```

:math:`t_i` can also be defined as the reciprocal of a cycle time
:math:`T_{cyc}`, intended as the time needed to process the whole inventory.

For simplicity, :math:`\epsilon_i` and :math:`t_i`
can be combined together in one single user-defined parameter that is defined
again as :math:`t_i`.
Thus, setting a transfer rate coefficient of 1 s\ :sup:`-1` at 100% efficiency, would be
the same as setting 10 s\ :sup:`-1` at 10%.

Note that this formulation assumes first order transfer and
a homogeneous distribution of nuclide :math:`i` throughout the material.

A more rigorous description of removal rate and its implementation can be found
in the paper by `Hombourger
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.anucene.2020.107504>`_.

The resulting burnup matrix can be solved with the same integration algorithms
that are used in the absence of the transfer term.

.. note::

    If no ``destination_material`` is specified, nuclides that are removed
    or fed will not be tracked afterwards.

Coupling materials
------------------

To keep track of removed nuclides or to feed nuclides from one depletable material
to another, the respective depletion equations have to be coupled. This can be

> achieved by defining one multidimensional square matrix with dimensions equal to

Reviewer 2: The term "multidimensional square matrix" is confusing. If you google this, nothing turns up explicitly matching that term, and it resembles this page:

https://www.mathworks.com/help/matlab/math/multidimensional-arrays.html

which is just a tensor. And that's not what this depletion matrix is.

It's a block matrix, with diagonal blocks corresponding to depletion matrices of each material and off-diagonal blocks corresponding to inter-material coupling. We should definitely use that terminology here as it conveys what's actually happening much better.

the number of depletable materials that transfer nuclides.
The diagonal positions are filled with the usual depletion matrices
:math:`\mathbf{A_{ii}}`, where the index :math:`i` indicates the depletable
material id, and the off-diagonal positions are filled with the transfer matrices
:math:`\mathbf{T_{ij}}`, positioned so that that the indices :math:`i` and

> :math:`j` indicate the nuclides receiving and loosing materials, respectively.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:math:`j` indicate the nuclides receiving and losing materials, respectively.
```

The nuclide vectors are assembled together in one single vector and the resulting
system is solved with the same integration algorithms seen before.

As an example, consider the case of two depletable materials and one
transfer defined from material 1 to material 2. The final system will look like:

.. math::

  \begin{aligned}\frac{d}{dt}\begin{pmatrix}\vec{N_1}\\ \vec{N_2}\end{pmatrix} &=
  \begin{pmatrix}\mathbf{A_{11}} & \mathbf{0}\\ \mathbf{T_{21}} & \mathbf{A_{22 }}

>   \end{pmatrix} \begin{pmatrix}\vec{N_1}\\ \vec{N_2}\end{pmatrix} \end{aligned}

Reviewer 2: nice illustrative example!
